# Spatiotemporal variations in primary care physician density and population mortality across U.S. counties, 2005-2015
Sanjay Basu1,2*, Seth A. Berkowitz3, Russell S. Phillips2

1 Center for Primary Care and Outcomes Research and Center for Population Health Sciences, Departments of Medicine and of Health Research and Policy, Stanford University

2 Center for Primary Care, Harvard Medical School

3 Department of General Medicine and Clinical Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

*basus@stanford.edu

Background:
Whether and to what degree primary care physicians can influence population-wide health outcomes remains heavily debated. Traditionally, assessments from the field of social epidemiology suggested that there is little or no measurable influence of medical care, including preventive and curative services delivered through primary care, on population health metrics such as life expectancy.1 Thomas McKweon’s 1976 assessment of death in England and Wales suggested that while life expectancy had increased by 23 years over the prior half century, little of the advance could be attributed to medical care;2 the previous year, Ivan Illich claimed more radically that medical care did more harm than good to population health.3 In the three decades that followed, improvements in life expectancy were more consistently attributed to advances in biomedicine including the treatment of hypertension,4,5 but contradictions also appeared, such as the increase in mortality rates from diseases amenable to medicine in areas with the most medical care resources.6 

While many debates concerning medical care and population health focused on analysis of rich data from the United Kingdom, within the United States, debates during the early 21st century often compared aggregate U.S. medical care characteristics and population health statistics to that of international peers. Starfield and colleagues prominently argued that by comparing the United States to other countries with high average income, the availability of primary care services—that is, services provided by a generalist physician in an accessible manner across a broad range of illnesses and with longitudinal continuity between patient and provider—could be associated with lower all-cause and cause-specific mortality, when analyses were aggregated at the level of entire nations.7 State-level and metro-area assessments in the 1990’s also showed that large areas with more primary care physicians tended to have better birth outcomes and lower overall and cause-specific mortality,8–12 although whether these associations were independent of other types of medical care, overall healthcare infrastructure, and unaccounted-for community factors remains unclear. 

Recent assessments of smaller area-level inequalities in the United States during the early 2000’s suggested increasing variations in life expectancy and cause-specific mortality across the nation, including stagnating or decreasing life expectancy in some counties, and increasing mortality from substance use and self-harm.13–15 Simultaneously, since the early 2000’s, healthcare reforms at the state and national level dramatically expanded financial support for primary care and increased the financial responsibility of medical care providers for population-health outcomes. For example, primary care providers and their associated healthcare ownership companies in many states have received increased funding to support proactive treatment of hypertension, diabetes, depression, substance abuse, and other chronic conditions, and conversely received financial penalties if they failed to meet population health metrics for their catchment population.16–21 Large state and national initiatives are now expanding support for population health measures to be integrated into primary care clinics, such as by coordinating services for income, food, employment, and housing support through primary care clinics, and directing an increasing supply of primary care physicians to underserved regions through financial incentives.22–24 

How primary care physician supply has changed over the last decade in the United States remains unclear. It also remains unclear to what extent changes in primary care physician supply can help to explain recent temporal and geographic variations in mortality across the United States. Addressing these uncertainties is critical to identify whether existing primary care initiatives are related to population health, and whether further efforts to expand primary care physician supply have the potential to produce measurable population health improvements. Here, we sought to assess temporal and geospatial variations in primary care physician density, and test the a priori null hypothesis that those variations do not significantly relate to variations in life expectancy and cause-specific mortality among U.S. counties from 2005 through 2015.


References:
1. 	Bunker JP. The role of medical care in contributing to health improvements within societies. Int J Epidemiol. 2001;30(6):1260-1263. doi:10.1093/ije/30.6.1260
2. 	McKeown T. The Role of Medicine: Dream, Mirage, or Nemesis?; 2014. https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=xLr_AwAAQBAJ&oi=fnd&pg=PP1&dq=McKeown+T.+The+Role+of+Medicine:+Dream,+Mirage,+or+Nemesis%3F+London:+Nuffield+Provincial+Hospitals+Trust,+1976.&ots=NugheFJRdl&sig=0AHF_NDFAyeiLEldnUXuhzgzzbY. Accessed March 27, 2018.
3. 	Illich I. Medical Nemesis : The Expropriation of Health. London: Pantheon Books; 1975.
4. 	Bunker JP. Medicine matters after all. J R Coll Physicians Lond. 1995;29(2):105-112. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7595883. Accessed March 27, 2018.
5. 	Mackenbach J. The contribution of medical care to mortality decline: McKeown revisited. J Clin Epidemiol. 1996;49(11):1207-1213. https://repub.eur.nl/pub/53400/1-s2.0-S0895435696002004-main.pdf. Accessed March 27, 2018.
6. 	Carr-Hill R, Hardman G, Lancet IR-T, 1987  undefined. Variations in avoidable mortality and variations in health care resources. Elsevier. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0140673687928108. Accessed March 27, 2018.
7. 	Macinko J, Starfield B, research LS-H services, 2003  undefined. The contribution of primary care systems to health outcomes within Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, 1970–1998. Wiley Online Libr. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1475-6773.00149/full. Accessed March 19, 2018.
8. 	Shi L, Macinko J, Starfield B, Politzer R, Xu J. Primary care, race, and mortality in US states. Soc Sci Med. 2005;61(1):65-75. doi:10.1016/J.SOCSCIMED.2004.11.056
9. 	Shi L, Macinko J, Starfield B, Wulu J, Regan J, Politzer R. The relationship between primary care, income inequality, and mortality in US States, 1980-1995. J Am Board Fam Pract. 16(5):412-422. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14645332. Accessed March 29, 2018.
10. Shi L, Macinko J, Starfield B, Xu J, Politzer R. Primary Care, Income Inequality, and Stroke Mortality in the United States: A Longitudinal Analysis, 1985-1995. Stroke. 2003;34(8):1958-1964. doi:10.1161/01.STR.0000082380.80444.A9
11. Shi L, Macinko J, Starfield B, et al. Primary care, infant mortality, and low birth weight in the states of the USA. J Epidemiol Community Health. 2004;58(5):374. doi:10.1136/JECH.2003.013078
12. Shi L, Starfield B. The effect of primary care physician supply and income inequality on mortality among blacks and whites in US metropolitan areas. Am J Public Health. 2001;91(8):1246-1250. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11499112. Accessed March 29, 2018.
13. Case A, Deaton A. Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015;112(49):15078-15083. doi:10.1073/pnas.1518393112
14. Chetty R, Stepner M, Abraham S, et al. The association between income and life expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014. JAMA - J Am Med Assoc. 2016;315(16):1750-1766. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.4226
15. Dwyer-Lindgren L, Bertozzi-Villa A, Stubbs RW, et al. Trends and Patterns of Geographic Variation in Mortality From Substance Use Disorders and Intentional Injuries Among US Counties, 1980-2014. Jama. 2018;319(10):1013. doi:10.1001/jama.2018.0900
16. Song Z, Rose S, Safran DG, Landon BE, Day MP, Chernew ME. Changes in Health Care Spending and Quality 4 Years into Global Payment. N Engl J Med. 2014;371(18):1704-1714. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1404026
17. McWilliams JM, Landon BE, Chernew ME. Changes in Health Care Spending and Quality for Medicare Beneficiaries Associated with a Commercial ACO Contract. JAMA. 2013;310(8). doi:10.1001/jama.2013.276302
18. Schwartz AL, Chernew ME, Landon BE, McWilliams JM. Changes in Low-Value Services in Year 1 of the Medicare Pioneer Accountable Care Organization Program. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;2115(11):1. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.4525
19. McWilliams JM, Hatfield LA, Chernew ME, Landon BE, Schwartz AL. Early Performance of Accountable Care Organizations in Medicare. N Engl J Med. April 2016:NEJMsa1600142. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1600142
20. Song Z, Landon BE. Controlling Health Care Spending — The Massachusetts Experiment. N Engl J Med. 2012;366(17):1560-1561. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1201261
21. Dale SB, Ghosh A, Peikes DN, et al. Two-Year Costs and Quality in the Comprehensive Primary Care Initiative. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(24):2345-2356. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1414953
22. Bärnighausen T, Bloom DE. Financial incentives for return of service in underserved areas: a systematic review. BMC Health Serv Res. 2009;9(1):86. doi:10.1186/1472-6963-9-86
23. Kaufman A. Theory vs Practice: Should Primary Care Practice Take on Social Determinants of Health Now? Yes. Ann Fam Med. 2016;14(2):100-101. doi:10.1370/afm.1915
24. Berkowitz SA, Hulberg AC, Standish S, Reznor G, Atlas SJ. Addressing Unmet Basic Resource Needs as Part of Chronic Cardiometabolic Disease Management. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(2):244. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.7691

